## 2020-09-17 20:00 Europe/Madrid

### Attendees

* …
* John-David Dalton
* Steve Hicks
* Fred Kleuver
* Ben Coe
* Rick Button
* Ujjwal Sharma
* Daniel Ehrenberg
* Justin Ridgewell
* Richard Gibson
* Michel Weststrate

### Agenda and notes

#### September 2020 TC39 agenda

* [Record & Tuple](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple/) Stage 2 update ([slides](https://button.dev/talks/record-and-tuple-tc39-sept-2020.pdf)): [adding Box](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple/pull/197)
* Decorators Stage 2 status update: [new proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/) iteration
    * Chris: *presents update for decorators* 
    * Chris: now decorators always mean the same thing, consistently.
    * Dan: we redid the proposal and are bringing it to the committee. Does anyone have any concerns with it?
    * Chris: this proposal is less about intercepting prop desks, but intercepting the value instead.
    * Justin: why did we opt for wrapping methods as opposed to turning into getters and setter like in fields.
    * Dan: one of the goals was to not incur extra overhead where not needed. Why would you need to change things to accessors for cases other than bound.
    * Chris: even for bound, they were not ideal.
    * Justin: static field decorators were applied after the class descriptors.
    * Dan: this was decided by the static fields proposal in the TC39 meeting in Munich, it’s just how static fields work.
    * Dan: earlier proposals tried to solve this in a fancier way, and TS does that too, but to me it seems like something that cannot be adopted in the standard
    * Dan/Caridy: when you decorate an accessor pair, you need to decorate both individually which is a departure from what happens in Babel.
    * Caridy: we did a few studies, and there were compelling reasons for both (having it for individuals and for the pair), but having it in one place is a refactor hazard. Single decorators also have a heavier cognitive load.
    * Dan: there was a legacy Ember use-case but it’s not needed anymore?
    * Chris: it’s something we’re actively trying to get rid of, so I won’t let that shape the spec.
* [Import Assertions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-assertions) for Stage 3 ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1RuWMkNAatIZ6lhcdslD8cUD-zntioptqH1-hTbVlhzg) WIP)
    * Dan: gives background on proposal.
    * JDD: let’s keep them simple?
    * Jason: are we still entertaining the old format?
    * Dan: shows the status-quo.
    * Dan: we didn’t make the type special, but we decided to generalize all use-cases into a key/value.
    * Jason: is that an object literal?
    * Dan: no, it is static.
    * Jordan: because it is hoisted and evaluated before everything else anyway, it could be easily checked that nothing there is not static.
    * Jason: what about dynamic imports?
    * Dan: sure, that’s just ECMAScript.
    * Dan: these are just assertions and not transformations. On the web, it is done with mimetype, elsewhere, it is done through the extension. But it doesn’t include any transformations, it just returns everything as-is or an error. If you want to include transformations, that could be brought to the committee, but it is not permitted by the current spec.
    * Jason: with the exception of JSON?
    * Dan: JSON is not an exception, it is an example. I would be happy to work with someone else on the import-with proposal, but we’ve split the semantics.
* [JSON Modules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-json-modules) update ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1_dgRPueD2dwSIsVOXVexYOncCRrDPcm_CPnswq9zOe4) WIP)
* [Arbitrary Strings as export/import names](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/2154)
    * Dan: wouldn’t this be cool?
    * Jason: this would be great for CSS modules.
    * Jordan: the thing is, WASM would probably do this anyway.
    * Minko: does it have any implications for tree-shaking?
    * Dan: No, an identifier inside here would just throw a SyntaxError.
* [Numeric literal suffixes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-extended-numeric-literals) update: separate namespace version ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1lD2NN0I3HFhTqFCtz7WTXEsbbxno4VqfUOUwZgrGHRs/edit#slide=id.p))
    * Dan: presents slides. 
    * Dan: is this idea interesting for someone here?
* [Intl.DisplayNames](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-displaynames) for Stage 4 ([spec](https://tc39.es/proposal-intl-displaynames/) /[ slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1SicCmt1bo4jyMTvAUiumCBW2ZqUh_-a18xrTO9nqG7U/edit?usp=sharing) /[ PR](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/502) )
* [Ergonomic brand checks for private fields](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-fields-in-in) for stage 3 ([issue](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-fields-in-in/issues/7))
    * Jordan: presents explainer
    * Michel: the first example seems most intuitive to me. I prefer that syntax. For me the mental model of ‘in’ doesn’t imply at all that the member must be accessible through brackets as well.
    * Jordan: what I’m particularly interested in hearing in either direction is: if you agree with the mental model that `#x in obj` implies `obj.#x` works. Right now, there’s one delegate who has that mental model, but if others do not share it, it may convince them to change their stance on the subject.
    * Caridy: it also applies to the solution Daniel proposed. I don’t see it as a problem. On the other hand, I think Dan’s proposal is much more powerful, so I’d need to think more about it. Would it require passing around membranes to work with those objects.
    * Jordan: would the in syntax interfere with Daniel’s suggestion?
    * Caridy: no.
    * Daniel: I agree. I think these could be two separate proposals that coexist.
    * Steve Hicks: "#key in" and “key in” are syntactical different elements, so that they have different meaning (not supporting bracket access) is completely fine to me 
* [Class static initialization block](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-static-block) for Stage 2 ([spec](https://tc39.github.io/proposal-class-static-block),[ slides](https://1drv.ms/p/s!AjgWTO11Fk-TkehkMWh3eO58Dz2Izw?e=2JXhGZ))
* [Class Access Expressions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-class-access-expressions) for Stage 2 ([spec](https://tc39.es/proposal-class-access-expressions/),[ slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ATxFyZUYv9WvmLMFPDIuJ5QSpoVTIdqM0ThH2JPpzFw/edit?usp=sharing))
* [Builtin Modules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-built-in-modules) for Stage 2 ([spec](http://tc39.es/proposal-built-in-modules/),[ slides](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-built-in-modules/blob/master/slides/BuiltInModules-For-Stage2-TC39-Sept-2020.pdf))
* [Resizable and growable ArrayBuffers](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-resizablearraybuffer/) for Stage 2 ([spec](https://tc39.es/proposal-resizablearraybuffer),[ slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MnLKwT5vgWX8x3jZ0i-z92Twm6EEaEEbhG9VwfONfXU/edit?usp=sharing))
* [String.dedent](https://github.com/mmkal/proposal-multi-backtick-templates) for stage 1 ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OihdYij2Nwox1i-XgdAyTBZCatHXxpGvXiQsK0Qmvnc/edit#slide=id.p))
    * Justin: explains proposal
    * Michel: who do I need to pay to make this happen?
    * Justin: Exactly. That said, there are two proposals for this, ``` and dedent`. The latter is better because we don’t need to make syntactic changes for it.
    * Dan: but it is still transpile-able, right?
    * Justin: presents issue for it. 

#### Bundling

* Should we have some kind of browser-native bundling format, or is the current ecosystem fine?
* Some options: 
    * [Web Bundles](https://github.com/WICG/webpackage/): Actually doesn't depend on the 
    * JS [named inline modules](https://gist.github.com/littledan/c54efa928b7e6ce7e69190f73673e2a0)
    * (For WebAssembly) [Module linking proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/module-linking/blob/master/proposals/module-linking/Explainer.md)
    * A combination!
* We can bring browser experts to a future meeting if folks are interested
