## 2020-08-20 20:00 Europe/Madrid

### Attendees

1. Fred Kleuver
2. Justin Fagnani
3. Misko Hevery
4. Minko Gechev
5. Daniel Ehrenberg
6. Jordan Harband
7. Rick Button
8. Caridy Patino
9. Rob Eisenberg
10. Robin Richard
11. Richard Feldman
12. Bradley Fairas
13. Steve Hicks
14. Jase Williams
15. Ujjwal Sharma

### Agenda and notes

#### July 2020 TC39 summary

* Many proposals reached Stage 4:
    * [NumericLiteralSeparator](https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/2043)
    * [Intl.ListFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-list-format)
    * [Intl.DateTimeFormat dateStyle/timeStyle](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-datetime-style)
    * [Promise.any & AggregateError](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-promise-any)
    * [WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs/) reached Stage 4 but with [CleanupSome](https://github.com/codehag/proposal-cleanup-some) broken off into a separate Stage 2 proposal
    * [Logical Assignment](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-logical-assignment/)
* [Records and Tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) reached Stage 2; we're considering ways to enable references to objects
    *  DE: Symbols as WeakMap keys, as a way to put symbols in records and tuples that let you point to objects at a high level, but some say it is too difficult to use. We’ve been considering this Box idea, but in the context of membranes.
    *  JF: Is there a good place to read about Box?
    *  RRD: There is a section at the top of the Symbols as WeakMap keys proposal. [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-symbols-as-weakmap-keys#boxing-objects-to-place-in-records-and-tuples-while-avoiding-bookeeping](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-symbols-as-weakmap-keys#boxing-objects-to-place-in-records-and-tuples-while-avoiding-bookeeping)
    *  DE: We have some rough documents that we have been working on. We can share this gist we have that talks about moving Records and Tuples to objects, but it is very uncertain right now. I am happy that we are working on this in stage 2.
    *  RRD: So it’s clear, the transforming back to object proposal doesn’t break equality comparisons, and this object oriented approach preserves that.
        * Records and Tuples as objects without identity (proposal, not part of the current proposal) [https://gist.github.com/littledan/20e15111b98f384644ba1fdd7d035c95](https://gist.github.com/littledan/20e15111b98f384644ba1fdd7d035c95)
* [Cognitive dimensions of notation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OpKfS5UYgcwmBuejoSOBpbgsYXXzO0gG7GJHo65UXPE/edit#slide=id.p): A new idea for how to talk about the pros and cons of TC39 proposals
* [Intl.Segmenter](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter) reached Stage 3
* [Import Assertions](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-conditions) (was: module attributes) at Stage 2, hoping to propose for Stage 3 next meeting
* [Iterator Helpers](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-iterator-helpers) at Stage 2, approaching Stage 3 in the future
* [ResizableArrayBuffer and GrowableSharedArrayBuffer](https://github.com/syg/proposal-resizablearraybuffer) reached Stage 1
* [Async Context](https://github.com/legendecas/proposal-async-context) (like Zones/dynamic scope) again blocked from Stage 1
   * RE: What is the status of ergonomic brand checks?
   
   * JHD: There was some pushback from a delegate that if private fields were never - if you do #x in foo, that implies too strongly that foo[#x] should work, they believe there is an invariant there, it seemed like a widely held opinion that it is not confusing
   
   * DE: JHX made several arguments.
   
   * JHD: we don’t have a procedure to override objections.
   
   * DE: -
   
   * JF: Syntactically, with an in check, you are going to have a string literal -
   
   * JHD: It must be an expression, not a string literal.
   
   * JF: #something isn’t an expression.
   
   * JHD: Exactly, the argument is that it makes you think that #something is an expression. You get an early syntax error, so it wasn’t objected for stage 3, but because of this objection it wasn’t moved to stage 3. It is unlikely that there will ever be a first class value for #brand, it is not out of the question that we would make [#brand] work, it is additional syntax the same as the dot form. If neither thing happened, it is a tricky situation where either the delegate needs to withdraw the objection, or it stands.
   
   * DE: I don’t think the objection makes much sense. If we wanted to go with a first class vlaue, we could do it. We could have an object that represents the reference to the private name. It wouldn’t be a primitive because it wouldn’t be membrane friendly. `private.name` syntax is one possible solution. I think it is viable, not all delegates can talk to the delegate in private.
   
   * JF: I’m in favor of private names in general, to implement protected, friend, etc., visibility
   
   * JHD: I don’t think it would solve the objection, it would provide the capability.
   
   * DE: Right, we could add `in` later. Let’s talk more about this offline.
   
   * JHD: My goal is ergonomics, and I don’t find this ergonomic. I’d rather see the `in` syntax work regardless of your suggestion.
   
   * BFS: One thing we didn’t mention, the delegate wanted to entangle reification of private names to ergonomic brand checks. There have been suggestions, but no concrete proposal. The delegate did not want to move forward with ergonomic brand checks until we had a fleshed out proposal for first class private names.
   
   * DE: That’s what this is.
   
   * BFS: This is a little different. It does provide a first class value, but doesn’t provide a property key.
   
   * DE: That is by design.
   
   * BFS: He has a very specific solution in mind. When we were talking about operator position to be consistent. He wants the operator to match the right hand side of member access.
   
   * DE: What do people not in committee think about this space?
   
   * SH: I’d love to understand better. The syntax is cryptic.
   
   * DE: There is one part speculating about what JHX wants. The other question is what do you all want? Would this be useful? Would #name in object be more useful?
   
   * JF: I think ideally, it would be awesome to have a private name as a first class value as a property key. I think it makes sense to be able to put a private name on two difference objects.
   
   * BFS: This sounds like private declarations.
   
   * DE: Yeah, I talked to JRL about it, it is similar.
   
   * JHD: I don’t get why it can’t just be a property key. I don’t get how it is a problem with membranes.
   
   * DE: I feel like this is a complex topic, we should save it for another meeting.
   
   * JF: Can someone paste a link to private declarations?
   
   * BFS: [https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-declarations](https://meet.google.com/linkredirect?authuser=0&dest=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Ftc39%2Fproposal-private-declarations)
   
   * RE: Did Map.prototype.emplace move to stage 3?
   
   * DE: Pushback from Mozilla
   
   * BFS: Variety of miscommunications about it. Familiarly with other languages which use split workflows for the various APIs, ruby and python have minor differences, so there was a lot of miscommunication. We have a pinned issue about splitting the proposal, not necessarily into two proposals, but two APIs. This has it’s own issues, but if that is what it takes to get the feature through, splitting would take the existing map function, and add a second parameter. If you wanted to insert a value because it was missing, you would use the default callback, and use map.set to update it. There was also various disagreement about the word emplace. We can’t move forward with that word.


#### New decorators alternative

* Gist: [https://gist.github.com/littledan/c10bf2a0309a02330cb4ef931daef103](https://gist.github.com/littledan/c10bf2a0309a02330cb4ef931daef103)
* (Skip this section if everyone has already reviewed and given feedback)
* We've been reviewing this in the decorators calls, and considering bringing it to a TC39 meeting
* What do you think? (especially if you haven't been able to give feedback yet)
   * MH: In my mind what is surprising, why is there such a distinct syntax between decorators and annotations?
   * DE: The reason is, for one, I’ve been wondering if you need annotations or just decorators, but we wanted it to be statically visible what the shape of the class is. This is a requirement from implementations. If we are making the transition to a getter/setter it should be syntactically apparent.
   * MH: There are 3 kinds of decorators/annotations.
      * Global side effects
      * No global side effects
      * Annotations
   * JHD: Why is tree shaking relevant? The browsers don’t care about that.

   * MH: Tooling does. As of now when you have a decorator, the tree shaker cannot decide whether or not it is effectful.
   
   * DE: Can’t it analyze the decorator?
   
   * JHD: It requires whole program knowledge.
   
   * MH: Even closure compiler gets this wrong.
   
   * BF: This is equivalent to a function call, whether it is tree-shakeable depends on whether it is pure.
   
   * MH: I agree, I am trying to say that just as we have this constraint that annotations are statically analyzable, it would be useful for this to happen for decorators too.
   
   * DE: These decorators don’t get access to the class. They are never passed the final class, unless it is a class decorator. The method decorators don’t. They may have arbitrary side effects. I can picture that we can pass things or not pass things. What happens if a decorator doesn’t satisfiy those guarantees?
   
   * MH: at the end of the day we want to have the same syntax for these, but some things are guaranteed and some are not. It’s not clear to me how all of that could be embedded inside the current syntax.
   
   * JF: Another option to consider is that the reason for these differences is that the VM needs to know at parse time. It needs to know whether to create a getter/setter/etc. A tool can use whole program analysis, especially if you already have a tool in place. You could use standard decorator syntax and compile it away. You can do a component decorator, and the tool can optimize it away if possible.
   
   * MH: There is a lot of hand waving there, I will need some more time to think. Decorator might have @, but annotations might have @@.
   
   * DE: I don’t know if you noticed in the example, but @ don’t run code.
   
   * MH: I’m saying something syntactically. Decorators and annotations are the same thing, yes?
   
   * DE: No, annotations add metadata, and decorators execute.
   
   * MH: In the case of angular, when you annotate something as an app component, we would like to eagerly compile it, only if you use it. There is no way that the compiler can analyze the compiler itself.
   
   * DE: I think that is always going to be an unsound analysis. If you can execute arbitrary JavaScript, there can always be effects.
   
   * MH: You are arguing for the status quo.
   
   * JHD: There isn’t a way to improve on that. A tiny subset of the language is pure.
   
   * MH: Who is asking for the annotations.
   
   * DE: Cases like ORMs, or serialization frameworks, where they use fields, but don’t have immediate benefit from getter/setters, and instead need to attach metadata.
   
   * MH: I thought that annotations were put in for Angular.
   
   * DE: Not just for Angular needs. I don’t think Angular needs to change anything neccesarily, you can continue to use decorators.
   
   * JF: There are some interesting things Angular can do to desugar decorators into annotations where you need to attach some metadata. I think some standardization for how you store and retrieve metadata for class members.
   
   * MH: Yeah, but I’m not sure if they should be tied to decorators.
   
   * DE: It is attached to decorators because decorators aren’t passed the constructed value. In the legacy decorators you are given the original and there is a chain of defineProperty. In abscence of that, we need the ability to attach metadata. That would be compiled by the system into a bigger piece of metadata that you can consume easily.
   
   * MH: That makes sense. We can continue to use decorators, and continue to use our adhoc solution as before. This would mean that if Angular run in JIT mode, you can use native decorators. 
   
   * JF: I didn’t see this. Interesting.
   
   * DE: I’m not sure if it would be in the MVP, lots of people find the simple decorators in babel useful.
   
   * MH: as long as it is stored and possible to refer to later, we should be fine.
   
   * DE: This provides that. There are a lot of ideas in the further ideas section, and we can move them into the MVP proposal if it makes sense.
   
   * JF: I had another thing that reminded me, creating a toplevel getters and setters seems powerful. Why not?
   
   * DE: In principle I don’t see a problem. JHD had some design concerns.
   
   * JF: Thinking about let decorators that create getters/setters.
   
   * JHD: That needs to be it’s own separate thing. I think live bindings are gross. I wish it didn’t exist. Currently you can look at variable usage and statically know a lot of things about it. 
   
   * DE: You can statically analyze.
   
   * JHD: It would be less analyzable for humans. I am skeptical that there is a benefit for that.
   
   * JF: If you look at what svelte has done, it would let them desugar to getters/setters. An observable toplevel variable is interesting.
   
   * BFS: We talked about this in 2016 with Dave Herman, and brief discussions with engines, they were not keen on it. There are use cases for it, tracking, normalizing of values is one to ensure the runtime shape of values. It is an interesting thing. I’m not talking about assertings, but transformation of types.
   
   * DE: Normalizing values is interesting, because it is just the set case, and not the get case.
   
   * BFS: We can have a lot discussion about how you also want get.

   * JF: Maybe this can be added to the next agenda.

   * DE: On decorators, because Misko had a bunch of interesting thoughts, where did we land with that?

   * MH: From my POV, it doesn’t change much for angular, and can rely on our tree shaking.

   * MG: I agree. I think we covered everything we have concerns about. Compared to the previous proposal, this is slightly more restricted.

   * MH: the syntax won’t change, but the implementation will. I’m concerned that the parameters will not be part of the spec.

   * DE: We could include parameters in the spec, they could behave like mutable bindings like let decorators. Or as a follow on proposal. I can understand how you would want to wait for parameter decorators.

   * MH: Exactly, maybe the solution is for them to go in parallel.

   * DE: For the immediate action, including parameter decorators in the description. Does that seem reasonable?

   * MH: Yeah, it would give TS a path.

   * DE: The syntax in this proposal follows our previous stage 2 proposal. The reason is that there are several syntax invariants that delegates want to uphold.

   * MH: The export order is changing?

   * DE: I think so. I think there are other arguments.

   * JHD: I am also pessimistic that I can be persuaded.

   * MH: I don’t think I have the energy to fight that one. How would TS add types to annotation syntax?

   * DE: If the decorator is wrapping something, I can imagine that is typeable. We would need to discuss with TS more.

   * JF: Annotations are object literals?

   * DE: They can be any arbitrary object literal.

   * MH: It would need to be typed as any.

   * DE: We could encourage symbols.

   * JF: We could use "as".

   * MH: I’m not an expert, but I see a problem. I think we should bring the TS people in asap.

   * DE: We’ve been discussing with TS, and got preliminary feedback. This is a good point, the typability of annotations hasn’t been discussed before. Overall the main takeaway is that we should consider removing annotations.


   * DE: Anyone have any last comments?

   * RE: Metadata through a decorator is really important. I don’t have much need for the annotation syntax. I do need to be able to do annotations via decorators.

   * DE: That’s what I meant, just the literal syntax, not the annotation through decorators.

   * SH: The one thing I didn’t see anything of, was "final" (for fields or entire classes), it would be great to see it in decorators.

   * DE: You mean leting you declare a field const? That’s out of scope.

   * SH: It should be listed as explicitly out of scope.

   * DE: Yeah, thanks.

#### Temporal detailed review

* The Temporal proposal is approaching stability
* [https://tc39.es/proposal-temporal/docs/](https://tc39.es/proposal-temporal/docs/)
* Recent/upcoming changes:
    * Supporting negative durations
    * Supporting a combined DateTime+TimeZone type
* We'd like to "freeze" this API by the September meeting, to permit detailed, widespread review based on that snapshot (and possible further changes if needed)
