## June 30, 2020

## Attendees:

* Ujjwal Sharma (USA)
* Brian Kardell (BKL)
* Leo Balter (LEO)
* Michael Ficarra (MF)
* Bradley Farias (BFS)
* Bradford Smith (BSH)
* Brandon Mills (BMS)
* Rick Button (RBU)
* Ron Buckton (RBN)
* Yulia Startsev (mozilla)(YSV)
* Jordan Harband (???)
* Caridy Patino (???)

## Agenda and Notes:

Updates from recent June TC39 meeting and various developments

* Decimal, operator overloading, and value types  
    * The update is: There isn't a lot to formally update… Wasn't discussed at the June meeting formally. There are some other ideas developing in parallel, check it out if you have comments
    * BFS: Dan decently gave some info on the SES call - I would encourage you to look at these notes if you are interested.
* Quick [Temporal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-temporal) update, news from Ujjwal - could use a boost.
    * It did not progress formally in the last meeting, but we gave a progress report on how it is shaping up.  It is getting close to where we think it could go for stage advancement in the coming months. There were comments maybe asking for some more time. There seemed to be some agreement of a 2 month window.  
    * RB: I think one concern is that the proposal has been changing so much - it hasn't been stable enough for people to have a stable review in order to know what they are considering for advancement isn't significantly changing
    * USA: We already have a release of the polyfill on npm, it isn't for use in prod.  We also have a survey and we're looking for feedback.  We feel like we have an API that is complete, we aren't sure that people will agree - we'd like more feedback on the shape/design in the next couple of weeks.  We're hoping by the next meeting or so we can use this to lock things down that we are confident that it is good and in a stable position for advancement.
    * BK: The more use and input we get the better, so please help share it.
    * USA: There is a blog post, a polyfill and a survey - please feel free to share or not share whatever of these links you like… We appreciate it.
        * [paste links here plz, even a twitter link with these is helpful]

* [Records and Tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) update
    * RBU: Not a big update here - our intent/goals haven't changed… We're hoping to advance to stage 2 in July.  We're very interested in feedback as first time proposal writers, and in terms of your opinions… But, no big changes to note here.
    * BSH: Symbols as record keys are expected to be disallowed due to equality logic concerns. Was there another reason also?
    * RBU: you’re correct, ???
    * BFS: In some other phone calls we had concerns about Symbols being added potentially to prototypes of Record/Tuple. Right now there are guarantees of integrity based upon limited key values - if we did allow you to have symbols as keys on record and tuples adding a protocol to Record/Tuple with Symbols would be harder in the future.
    * JHD: ???
    * RBU: I don't want to speak for MM, but his concerns I think with doing a global order on symbols is that you implicitly expose that - whether you do that on insertion order or something…
    * JDH: For tuples, it's fine for me to not have symbols or to have them because it seems they aren't object-like and they have a prototype -- but for records, there is no way to have it participate in a protocol except to define it for record primitives.  I asked about boxed records and why it didn't have … ?  There would be no way to make a new protocol that supported records unless you built it and defined it for records.  If I wanted to make it 'somethingable' you have to account for records.
    * RBU: Correct. There’s an open issue on the R&T repo for this, not just ??? but also specifically about prototypes with Records. The current specification specifies it to null, but the alternative you mentioned is also very interesting 
    * JHD: For null objects, you still have to handle them, but they’re still edge cases and I expect Records not to be. I would expect (in the object prototype case) string lookups on record primitives to never fall back to the prototype; symbol lookups to fall back; boxed records would allow expandos and would fall back to the prototype; equality in records would ignore symbols and only consider strings, and record primitives would only allow string keys.
    * RBU: That effectively is the exact second option that we mention in the issue, I really have no strong opinion here, and am not opposed to either solution.
    * MF: I think the prototype solution is creative, but I’m skeptical of the idea of a protocol generally as opposed to for a particular shape of record - are there use cases that people really have… I'd like to hear more. 
    * RBU: I have none, specifically, I’ve just heard from people. 
    * JHD: I don’t have any concrete ones either, but I think it’s just a red flag for me to have Records proceed with a null prototype, talking of forward compatibility. 
    *  RBU: I guess I am in the same place… I recognize that by deciding to have a null prototype that we have to manually create them for protocols.
    * MF: A solution though is a simple wrapper if you want that
    * JHD: Then they lose equality by using a wrapper object.
    * MF: I would assume that there aren't general use cases unless someone has evidence that there are.  You would have to defer to a method.
    * YSV: would there be a case where a Record with a prototype would be the ideal solution?
    *  JHD: I think there is a precedent even for builtins like .toString … It's not law, but it kind of feels like it would be simpler in some ways to avoid littering the mental model with 'do something very special for records'
    * YSV: I would be interested in seeing your ideas about consistency written down somewhere so that I could consider them more carefully.  I am also looking at @@species and friends, and restricting builtin subclassing, so hearing this, I would be really interested in seeing those arguments articulated in case we need to make a similar decision here.
    * JHD: During discussions of object spread there were discussions for defining a protocol for how you iterate over an object - and there was discussion of how we could do that - for that I could definitely see wanting to have something where records would want to have a way to participate
    * MF: I kind of disagree with the legitimacy of that. I can see the point of something like that for Objects, when they’re used like Maps. But we don’t want Records to be treated like Maps.
    * JHD: How are records not map-like?
    * MF: Are you imagining the use cases are…
    * JHD: to me map-like means I have a key and associate it with a value...
    * MF: I was referring to maps being arbitrary relations of a particular shape between keys and values. … If you had a shaped record, you wouldn't be iterating arbitrary keys, you would be using the keys for the shape
    * RBU: I guess we might want to back up here. We don’t need to discuss if *this* protocol applies, but there’s got to be *some* protocol that applies to a Record. I will try to avoid taking the tooling call’s time, but we can discuss this in more detail.
* [Intl.Segmenter](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter) ([blocked on Stage 2 due to SES concerns](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter/issues/96#issuecomment-638985722))
    * USA: The only Intl proposal that is currently hitting snags, there is a link in the notes that talks about the SES concerns, the exotic internal slot hazard. These are the standing SES concerns against the proposal. Currently blocked on Stage 2, which is interesting because it is ready to ship in V8. Richard plans to work through these concerns and apply for Stage advancement next meeting. Not sure if anyone has anything to add.
    * YSV: We discussed it at the SES meeting. One thing that will come out of that is writing down what the invariant was. That will make things a lot clearer. Intl.Segmenter addressed Mark’s concerns, but we couldn’t agree if the invariant Mark raised was actually an invariant. Also there were logistical issues, it didn’t have a reviewer, and it was added after the deadline for advancement. There should be something coming soon for what SES’s concerns are concretely.
* [Function implementation hiding](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-function-implementation-hiding)
    * YSV: Mozilla blocked this proposal unilaterally, and I heard there was interest on this call. Feel free to contact me if you want to talk in more detail about it. The short version of our position is that the proposal is not strong enough in itself. We are neutral towards "hide source", but introducing directives just for “hide source” only for the purposes of blackboxing seems like a limited benefit that could be better solved in another way. This on it’s own doesn’t have enough justification for bringing back directives. We see “sensitive” as potentially harmful, and google shared a similar view. If you have any questions, or want to discuss this, please get in touch with me.
* [Intl.DurationFormat](https://github.com/tc39-transfer/proposal-intl-duration-format)
    * USA: This is a locale independent formatter for locations.  We presented this for stage advancement, and it did advance. We have a number of open issues, but we do have basic spec text done and if you are interested in this at all, we'd be really happy if you could look at the repo/issue tracker.
* [Subclassable built-ins](https://github.com/syg/proposal-rm-builtin-subclassing/)
    * YSV: The idea is that most engines have already been optimized for common cases, but it's hard to get right.  There are also concerns about layering with JavaScript from WASM, the way subclassable built-ins are specified, it's tricky to get right.  It doesn't look like there is very much adoption, but it does introduce a lot of complexity to both the spec and implementations.  For developers, restricting subclassing for builtins means that some expressiveness is limited - but given the evidence so far it might be web compatible.
    * BFS: We have around 400k that are assigning something to Symbol.species - domains, not pages. It looks like it is almost entirely babel / corejs.  We've set up some more research on this and we've not found anything that isn't that.  If we find something in the wild that isn't teaching how it works or something.  Angular uses it, but it isn't actually functionally useful.  If anybody is _actually_ using it, for non-educational/tutorial - please let us know.
    * BSH: I would think that more than Symbol.species …?
    * BFS: ???
    * YSV: The goal is to remove for sure type 4, there is already a patch for it in google, type 2 and 3 if  possible, and likely not type 1.
    * BSH: I presented some stuff and was surprised to hear people are ok with this, didn't even want 2.  Closure compiler has never supported extending built-in classes like Array so, no one within Google could possibly be using it.
* [Realms](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-realms)
    * LEO: Is the room interested?
    * BKL: Go ahead.
    * LEO: We’ve had the incubator calls and everything. The problem is, we currently have integration concerns with HTML for Realms. People in the HTML team would prefer an alternate solution than what we propose. The way the Document is implemented right now, there’s a single module graph for each Document, Realms require different module graphs, but we think Realms don’t make a whole lot of sense without out and any opinion in that direction is mostly very specific. So a TAG green flag would be all we need, for the most part. Implementation should not be too complicated. We have these issues listed and I could take any questions.
    * YSV: For us it would be making one of our internal functions public - the drawback is just that we wouldn't be able to change it in the future. What we have today is very similar to Realms
    * BFS: There was this idea that realms might be too difficult for implementers so there was this other idea to have syntactic hooks and manually create a membrane yourself -- it was referred to as super with, but it isn't related to existing with.
    * LEO: For me the only thing that I think is blocking me from moving on is the modules graph.  We need to get some better understanding with the HTML team about how we can do this - I don't see realms as solving the problems without this.  I don't know that I want to go down some kind of super with conversation.
    * BFS: ?? … If they must share the module graph with the thing that created - it seems like it would give little actual value
    * LEO: It definitely won't be presented in July for stage advancement. I'd like to reach a clarity point for these concerns before. Let's see how the TAG review goes.
* [Built-in modules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-built-in-modules)
* [Symbols as weakmap keys](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-symbols-as-weakmap-keys)
* [Deep path properties](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-deep-path-properties-for-record)
* [Decorators](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators/)
* [Import attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-attributes)
* Private [fields](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-fields) and [methods](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-private-methods)
* Standard Library
